(Male narrator) What happens when you mix
memoir with music, video, and words?
You get multimedia manifesto.
And when you reflect through,
as well as about, media composing,
you get moments like these,
captured on screen.
I’m searching for some sound.
There’s a shared response
with the machine.
[music begins to play]
Let’s play a YouTube clip.
Let’s adjust this a little bit.
Let’s think about how to arrange
these pieces.
About scale and movement. Focus. Time.
Let’s get a feel for the music.
For the mood.
Let’s play with this image,
create what we want to say
with these materials.
Layers, shapes, words,
that launch us into memory.
[Soft guitars play]
When I was about six,
I went to the Twelve Gates free school.
And this was in the ‘60s.
It was a hippie school.
The only rule was the teachers
couldn't tell you what to do.
We wandered downtown, scouring the city.
But I soon had to go to public school
and I was still just six,
and the first thing I did
was say, “shit,”
and had my mouth washed out with soap.
[distinct guitar note sounds and echoes]
My first question is personal.
What one thing would you change
about education?
[soft guitars]
My teaching memories start with 1993,
my first time in a computer classroom.
I put my PC disk in a Mac and erased
my syllabus on the first day.
That accident was the warm sun on my face.
The response was electric.
Do you want to reformat?
Just click okay.
[soft guitars]
The second memory weaves together
teaching and composing beyond words.
We learned to layer ideas
with images, sounds, language.
We learned to mark up text
and talk to servers to write the web.
We learned to code to help the web
write back.
Which leads to an affirmation.
Digital composing is comfortable with
learning to learn,
with technical play, with ephemera,
disappearance.
[soft music plays]
With tweak first, theorize later.
With what we call emergence, that edge
where chaos and composing
come together as creativity plays out.
[an electric guitar plays steady notes]
[a second guitar plays along]
[both guitars pause and echo
before the full band begins playing
But we still made claims and drew
conclusions:
Our thinking is like a network,
the computer will democratize
literature, writing, education.
This changes everything.
This is total disruption.
And it was instantiation of theories:
post-structural networks,
fluid texts, shifting authors.
[electric guitars]
We saw The Electronic Word and realized,
"the critical/creation dichotomy auto-
matically breaks down in a digital world."
[electric guitars, drums]
In the ‘90s, we were hacking away
at the web, trying to make it writable.
Which brings us to the do-it-yourself
attitude of the digital,
the studio or shop class suited for
tweaking and turning materials,
for working with hands and minds.
[sparse guitar notes echo]
(T.S. Eliot) "Let us go then, you and I."
So my introduction to
formalized education was rough.
But I still had some wonderful teachers.
In second grade, on another first day,
Mrs. Buchannon told me,
"Stick to your guns, when you think
you're right."
Looking past the ratty hair
and backing the new kid,
she showed me that learning is about
risk and trust.
[sparse guitar notes ring out]
In digital history, this piece on screen
is 2003,
and this is multimedia taking root.
This moment is a response
to programs like iMovie
and the lowering of technical hurdles.
This is the prosumer-push, full throttle.
[humming sound and light guitar notes]
My best class ever was
auto shop in high school.
My mentor, Erwin Schlaack, taught me
to recognize poetry in mechanical things.
Life lessons like torque
applied to metal bolt,
the breaking point, the backing off,
the just right moment,
which leads me to another question:
what should be our teaching philosophy?
[spares guitar notes echo]
The digital should be a place for
experimentation,
a place where you can try something.
Who knows what will happen?
We all can reflect on and practice
creative response.
Every project should be a revelation.
It's okay not to know how to do something.
It's okay to make mistakes.
When I first went to college, I brought my
Mexican mesh bag stocked for the beach:
Frisbee, sandals.
When I took a second crack
at a university, a teacher,
Mike Fischer, taught me to
write about ideas.
I thought I'd take on deconstruction.
I felt like literature didn't dissolve
anything,
but generated being
through insights and emotions,
"thoughts too deep for tears."
Then I started teaching with computers
and found the bubble.
Here, my life memories merge
with my recollections of a field.
I think of John Slatin,
who taught me about texts and code,
and working with those we love.
[music builds]
We are the lab discipline
of the humanities.
The place where art, music, film,
and story are cast together.
Where beliefs are created in response
to the material world.
"The river is moving."
Our writing is mixing.
[music builds]
We come to the connotational space
still slick with linguistics.
But I'm talking about extending the
beating in the veins and tracing it
all the way through software and symbol
and sound
[music builds]
and sound board
and keyboard.
[music builds]
We find in the connotational space glowing
image edge amid desktop under glass.
[music builds]
We cast texts and songs
and lights and people.
[guitars jam, cymbals crash]
I'm rolling toward the final question
of the technopoet.
[music builds]
Oh,
[music crescendos]
[guitar solo begins]
Do not ask . . . must we always manifesto?
The question’s rhetorical.
[guitar picks up]
This moment is now emerging.
Should we use this YouTube clip
we’ve found?
The question's rhetorical.
How could we not?
It's a part of this story, the memoir,
the performance.
[guitars and drums]
This is the twenty-third take
of a live improvisation.
Twenty-three takes among hundreds
of unsaved instances,
coming and going like the folding edge
of time.
This is me typing into the take.
This is you watching.
This is me talking over the take.
Us listening.
Clicking. Moving sound. Beating.
Playing with the band. Imagining.
Us, reworking the twenty-third take
[rapid guitar notes building]
of a ten-minute moment.
[music builds]
I used to think the prosumer approach
was important for teaching.
Of course it is.
But what I’ve learned is that the prosumer
is not about school.
It’s about everybody making everything.
[music builds]
That means me and you.
You don't create the prosumer,
you prosume.
You don't study digital composing,
[rapid guitar notes, crashing cymbals]
you perform it.
Must we always manifesto?’ Yes.
The question is who will speak
and what will we say as we cast
our creations into the mix.
[music builds]
The question is, what will we say?
[music crescendos, then echoes]
[crowd sounds]
[music builds]
We will say that words crash
and sweep and wave,
light speaks, and sounds have shape.
Do we write these waves and shapes
with our machines?
Yes.
Do we blow them into being like glass?
Look closely—the surface, still liquid
and light, refracts.
[music builds]
And when we bring the shimmering thing
here before us, we will say to beauty:
[music builds]
this is truth.
And we will say, don't watch your mouth.
[music builds]
Watch the bubble.
[music crescendos]
[music fades and echos]